# Digital Addiction 
In today’s world more people are spending their time filled with various digital activities. The release of iPhone in 2007 marked a new era of digital devices and services (Maisch and Meckel, 2009). With the rise of social media platforms in the past decade and the ever-growing mobile gaming industry people are becoming more connected with their machines and applications than with real world events. The increasing consumption of digital services does not come without a cost though.

Digitalization has, without a doubt, brought consumers good things. We can organize things more easily, we can collaborate with people around the world, and we can find information with much less ease. The downside is that with us deep in the digital world we can easily get too immersed in it. Moreover, as with anything, overconsumption can lead to addictions. According to Montag et al. (2019), ways of creating and fostering addiction in end users can be categorized in six distinct parts; endless scrolling or streaming, endowment effect, social pressure, showing users their preferred content, social comparison and rewarding and Zeigarnik effect.

Endless scrolling can be seen on all social media platforms. It leaves the user always wondering what interesting things might follow the last post they just came across. This endless feeding of dopamine can keep people locked in the screens for hours at a time. The endowment effect, also known as mere-exposure effect, describes how commitment to freemium games grows over time. When the user has spent countless hours achieving things in the game it creates a feeling of ownership which in turn makes it harder not to invest even more time into the game let alone delete it. Social pressure, in the context of social media platforms, can be described as a need to be always present. For example, many messaging services, such as Telegram and WhatsApp, to name a few, have implementing indicators when a recipient of a message has seen the message sent. This creates an incentive to reply to the message immediately since it is often expected that people do when they read messages. One way of keeping people engaged in the application for longer periods of time is to keep showing them content they like or at least in some way find interesting. With machine learning algorithms behind each user's “newsfeed” the platforms can easily and effectively adapt to users preferred content. Social comparison is also greatly used to create commitment and addiction to the platform. The ability to “like” or “thumbs up” something to express interest creates a hugely addictive way of making users create more content for others to consume. The Zeigarnik effect refers to humans being better at remembering tasks when they are interrupted. This effect is continuously utilized in freemium games and social media platforms which often send the user push notifications reminding them to engage more. (Montag et al., 2019)

According to Montag et al. (2019), it is important to understand that it is not necessarily the digital devices which cause addiction but rather the social media platforms and freemium games. This distinction is important to make since quite often the devices get blamed for adverse effects of the prolonged application usage. It is also important to understand that behind the addictive mechanisms of social media platforms and freemium games there is money. Moreover, often the business logic of these platforms and services relies on selling the data collected from its users. This data is then enriched and used for all sorts of purposes, for example, targeted advertising. The more data is collected and sold the more the companies make money. It is therefore in their interest to get the users to spend as much time at the platforms as possible.

Moreover, Bhargava and Velasquez (2019) argue that social media companies are aware of how their platforms promote digital addiction. They claim that companies use exploitative platform and game designs to keep users more engaged with their products. The most alarming aspect of this is that many of these mental harms causing addictive platforms are widely open for minors to use. (Bhargava and Velasquez, 2019) Even though many platforms set an age restriction in their terms of service, these terms are rarely enforced. This is especially damaging to children whose brains have not yet fully developed. (Sampasa-Kanyinga and Lewis, 2015)

The purposeful development of addictive services should not be illegal. We use the services because they provide us with the content we want to see and what gives us the dopamine rush. After a long day that might be, for some of us, exactly what we are looking for. Moreover, in the case of adolescents, these services and platforms should be heavily regulated and the usage restricted. Even though the regulation exists already in the terms of service by ruling out, in many cases, minors. These rules are nothing if they are not enforced. The companies creating these addictive freemium games and social media platforms know this very well, but it is in their interest not to stop it. More users mean more data and data is money. This is the reason governments should step in and limit the negative effects on minors. How could you stop minors from using the services? It should be the company's responsibility to figure that out. If they cannot, they will face significant fines. That would drive them on a quick and productive path of innovation. All and all the companies should take responsibility for the harm they are causing since they are the ones cashing in all the money from these platforms. 
 
## References 
Bhargava, V. R. & Velasquez, M. (2021) Ethics of the Attention Economy: The Problem of Social Media Addiction. Business ethics quarterly. [Online] 31 (3), 321–359.

Maisch, B. & Meckel, M. (2009) Innovationskommunikation 2.0 — Das Beispiel Apple iPhone. Marketing Review St. Gallen. [Online] 26 (2), 42–46. 

Montag, C. et al. (2019) Addictive Features of Social Media/Messenger Platforms and Freemium Games against the Background of Psychological and Economic Theories. International journal of environmental research and public health. [Online] 16 (14), 2612–. 

Sampasa-Kanyinga, H. & Lewis, R. F. (2015) Frequent Use of Social Networking Sites Is Associated with Poor Psychological Functioning Among Children and Adolescents. Cyberpsychology, behavior and social networking. [Online] 18 (7), 380–385. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 